[RLlib] Docs do-over (new API stack): New `MetricsLogger` API rst page. (#49538)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/rllib/metrics-logger.rst

implementations.

.. figure:: images/metrics_logger_overview.svg
    :width: 500
    :align: left

    **RLlib's MetricsLogger system**: Every subcomponent of an RLlib :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm` has-a
    :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` instance
    and uses it to locally log values. When a component completes a distinct task,
    for example, an :py:class:`~ray.rllib.env.env_runner.EnvRunner` finishing a sampling request, the local metrics of the subcomponent
    (``EnvRunner``) are "reduced", and sent upstream to the containing parent component (``Algorithm``).
    The parent component merges the received results into its own :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` and,
    at the end of its own task cycle, "reduces" as well for final reporting to the user or to Ray Tune.

.. note::
    So far, RLlib components owning a :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger`
    instance are :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`, :py:class:`~ray.rllib.env.env_runner.EnvRunner`,

>     :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.learner.learner.Learner`, and all :py:class:`~ray.rllib.connectors.connector_v2.ConnectorV2` classes.

Reviewer: `EpisodeReplayBuffer`s

Author: fixed

    The Ray team is considering expanding access to this API on other components as well.

Features of MetricsLogger
-------------------------

The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` API offers the following features:

- Users can log scalar values over time, such as losses or rewards.
- Thereby, users can configure different reduction types, in particular ``mean``, ``min``, ``max``, ``sum``, or ``None``.

> - Users can also specify sliding windows, over which these reductions take place, for example ``window=100`` to average over the

Reviewer: Maybe say something about `clear_on_reduce` and how aggregates are held in the history instead of accumulating large lists.

Author: done

    print(logger.peek("loss"))  # Expect: 0.045, which is the average over the last 2 values

The :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.peek` method allows you to
check the current underlying reduced result for some key, without actually having to call
:py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce`.

.. warning::

    You **shouldn't call the :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce` method ever** on any
    :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` object in your custom code.
    The only time RLlib invokes this API is at the end of a task cycle.
    RLlib controls all of these "hand over" points entirely, so unless you write your own subcomponent that reports to a parent component, such as
    :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`, you should refrain from calling the :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce`
    method on any :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger`.

    To get the current reduced result, use the :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.peek` method instead,
    which doesn't alter any underlying values.

> Instead of providing a flat key, you can also log a value under some nested key through passing in a tuple:

Reviewer: Very nice!

from your environment over time and for which it doesn't make sense to reduce them in any way.

Use the ``reduce=None`` argument for achieving this. However, it's strongly advised that you should also
set the ``clear_on_reduce=True`` flag, because this may cause memory leaks otherwise.
This flag assures that :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` clears out the underlying list of values after every
``reduce()`` handover operation, for example from :py:class:`~ray.rllib.env.env_runner.EnvRunner`
to :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`:

.. testcode::

    logger.log_value("some_items", value="a", reduce=None, clear_on_reduce=True)
    logger.log_value("some_items", value="b")
    logger.log_value("some_items", value="c")
    logger.log_value("some_items", value="d")

    logger.peek("some_items")  # expect a list: ["a", "b", "c", "d"]

    logger.reduce()
    logger.peek("some_items")  # expect an empty list: []

Logging a set of nested scalar values
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In case you are logging a nested structure of values, for example

> ``{"time_s": 0.1, "lives": 5, "rounds_played": {"player1": 10, "player2": 4}}`` and all values have the exact same log settings

Reviewer: A dict that is for any reason empty, will be reduced away, which is for collecting result dicts for a table is challenging.

Author: Ok, let me try this right now and fix, if possible ...

Author: Yeah, an empty dict is not logged at all. Meaning ...
```
metrics.log_dict({}, key="abc")
```
... results in `metrics` not undergoing any changes, which I think makes a lot of sense. There are simply no keys to be logged and the underlying `tree.map_structure` doesn't have any nested structure to loop through.

    stats = {"player1": 100.0, "player2": 105.0}
    logger.log_dict(stats, key="mean_scores", reduce="mean", window=10)

    # Later, do the same again.
    stats = {"player1": 150.0, "player2": 110.0}
    logger.log_dict(stats, key="mean_scores")

    print(logger.peek(("mean_scores", "player1")))  # <- expect 125.0

Logging non-scalar data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` isn't limited to scalar values.
You can also use it to log images, videos, or any other complex data.

Normally, you would chose the previously described ``reduce=None`` argument. For example, to
log three consecutive image frames from a ``CartPole`` environment, do the following:

.. testcode::

    import gymnasium as gym

    env = gym.make("CartPole-v1")

    # Log three consecutive render frames from the env.
    # Make sure to set ``clear_on_reduce=True`` to avoid memory leaks.
    env.reset()
    logger.log_value("some_images", value=env.render(), reduce=None, clear_on_reduce=True)
    env.step(0)
    logger.log_value("some_images", value=env.render())
    env.step(1)
    logger.log_value("some_images", value=env.render())

> Timing things

Reviewer: "Timing processes"?

Author: Fine, renamed into `Timing code blocks`. :D

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` is context capable and offers the following
simple API to log timer results.
Notice that you can now time all your code blocks of interest inside your custom code through a single ``with-`` line:

.. testcode::

    import time
    from ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger import MetricsLogger

    logger = MetricsLogger()

    # First delta measurement:
    with logger.log_time("my_block_to_be_timed", reduce="mean", ema_coeff=0.1):
        time.sleep(1.0)

    # EMA should be ~1sec.
    assert 1.1 > logger.peek("my_block_to_be_timed") > 0.9

    # Second delta measurement:
    with logger.log_time("my_block_to_be_timed"):
        time.sleep(2.0)

    # EMA should be ~1.1sec.
    assert 1.15 > logger.peek("my_block_to_be_timed") > 1.05

> Also note that the default logging behavior is through exponential mean averaging (EMA), with a default coefficient of 0.01.

Reviewer: Maybe describing how to use a simple mean instead?

Author: Actually, we don't support this yet :D 
You can do a simple mean over a window, yes, but not over all lifetime, b/c we don't have a proper mechanism yet to  keep the list of values small. You could do `logger.log_value([key], [value], reduce="mean", window=float("inf"))`, but that would cause a mem leak at some point. We need to fix this by keeping track of the number of items logged thus far and then keeping the internal list smaller, but still providing the proper lifetime average. To be completely honest, not sure how useful a lifetime average would be (as opposed to an EMA, which makes more sense to report). But we should fix this either way ...

.. include:: /_includes/rllib/we_are_hiring.rst

.. _rllib-metric-logger-docs:

MetricsLogger API
==================

.. include:: /_includes/rllib/new_api_stack.rst

> The RLlib team has designed the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The RLlib team designed the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` API
```

> to unify and make accessible the logging and processing of stats and metrics during your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to unify and make accessible the logging and processing of stats and metrics during
```

reinforcement learning (RL) experiments. RLlib's :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`
class and all its sub-components each have one :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger`
instance managing metrics and statistics for this component. When a subcomponent reports back to its
parent component, it "reduces" the logged results and sends them upstream.

> The RLlib team encourages you to use this API in all your custom code, like in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The RLlib team recommends this API for all your custom code, like in
```

#. Each :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.learner.learner.Learner` calls :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce` on its own :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` instance and returns the resulting stats dict.
#. The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm` merges the ``m`` received stats dicts into its own :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` instance under the top-level key "learners", thereby keeping all log-settings chosen by the :py:class:`~ray.rllib.core.learner.learner.Learner` actors.
#. The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm` may add standard stats to its own :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` instance, for example the average time of a parallel sample request.
#. The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm` calls :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce` on its own :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` instance, compiling and returning a complete and final stats dict to the user or Ray Tune.

The MetricsLogger APIs in detail
--------------------------------

> Before you can use :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` in your custom code, you should familiarize

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before you can use :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` in your custom code, familiarize
```

.. testcode::

    logger.log_value("loss", 0.02)  # don't have to repeat `reduce` or `window` args,
                                    # because the key already exists.
    logger.log_value("loss", 0.03)
    logger.log_value("loss", 0.04)
    logger.log_value("loss", 0.05)

Because you specified a window of 2, :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` only uses the last 2 values to compute the reduced result.
You can ``peek()`` at the currently reduced result throug the :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.peek` method:

.. testcode::

    # Peek at the current, reduced value.
    # Note that in the underlying structure, the internal values list still
    # contains all logged values: 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, and 0.05.
    print(logger.peek("loss"))  # Expect: 0.045, which is the average over the last 2 values

The :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.peek` method allows you to
check the current underlying reduced result for some key, without actually having to call
:py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce`.

.. warning::

>     You **shouldn't call the reduce() method yourself** on any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    **Don't call the reduce() method yourself** on any
```

    :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` from your custom code.
    The only time RLlib invokes this API is at the end of a task cycle.
    RLlib controls all of these "hand over" points entirely, so unless you write your own subcomponent that reports to a parent component, such as

>     :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`, you should refrain from calling the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`, refrain from calling the
```

    :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.reduce` method.

    To get the current reduced results, use the :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.peek` method instead,
    which doesn't alter any underlying values.

Instead of providing a flat key, you can also log a value under some nested key through passing in a tuple:

.. testcode::

    # Log a value under a deeper nested key.
    logger.log_value(("some", "nested", "key"), -1.0)
    print(logger.peek(("some", "nested", "key")))  # expect: -1.0

To use reduce methods, other than "mean", specify the ``reduce`` argument in
:py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.log_value`:

.. testcode::

    # Log a maximum value.
    logger.log_value(key="max_value", value=0.0, reduce="max")

> Because you didn't specify a ``window`` and are using ``reduce="max"``, the window used is the infinite window,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because you didn't specify a ``window`` and are using ``reduce="max"``, RLlib uses the infinite window,
```

meaning :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` reports the lifetime maximum value,
whenever reduction takes place or you peek at the current value:

.. testcode::

    for i in range(1000, 0, -1):
        logger.log_value(key="max_value", value=float(i))

>     logger.peek("max_value")  # expect: 1000.0, which is the lifetime max (infinite window)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    logger.peek("max_value")  # Expect: 1000.0, which is the lifetime max (infinite window)
```

You can also chose to not reduce at all, but to simply collect individual values, for example a set of images you receive
from your environment over time and for which it doesn't make sense to reduce them in any way.

Use the ``reduce=None`` argument for achieving this. However, it's strongly advised that you should also

> set the ``clear_on_reduce=True`` flag, because this may cause memory leaks otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set the ``clear_on_reduce=True`` flag, because this setting may cause memory leaks otherwise.
```

This flag assures that :py:class:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger` clears out the underlying list of values after every
``reduce()`` handover operation, for example from :py:class:`~ray.rllib.env.env_runner.EnvRunner`
to :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm`:

.. testcode::

    logger.log_value("some_items", value="a", reduce=None, clear_on_reduce=True)
    logger.log_value("some_items", value="b")
    logger.log_value("some_items", value="c")
    logger.log_value("some_items", value="d")

    logger.peek("some_items")  # expect a list: ["a", "b", "c", "d"]

    logger.reduce()
    logger.peek("some_items")  # expect an empty list: []

Logging a set of nested scalar values
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In case you are logging a nested structure of values, for example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're logging a nested structure of values, for example
```

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

A metrics logged with the settings ``reduce="sum"`` and ``clear_on_reduce=False`` is considered
a ``lifetime`` counter, accumulating counts over the entire course of the experiment without ever resetting
the value back to 0. If you also add the ``with_throughput=True`` flag, the underlying metric automatically computes the throughput per second
on each ``reduce()`` operation.

The :py:class:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm` automatically compiles an extra key for each such metric, adding the suffix ``_throughput``
to the original key and assigning it the value for the throughput per second.

You can use the :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger.MetricsLogger.peek` method with the call argument ``throughput=True``
to access the throughput value. For example:

.. testcode::

    import time
    from ray.rllib.utils.metrics.metrics_logger import MetricsLogger

    logger = MetricsLogger()

    for _ in range(3):
        logger.log_value("lifetime_count", 5, reduce="sum", with_throughput=True)

        # RLlib triggers a new throughput computation at each `reduce()` call
        logger.reduce()
        time.sleep(1.0)

>         # Expect the first call to return NaN b/c we don't have a proper start time for the time delta.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # Expect the first call to return NaN because we don't have a proper start time for the time delta.
```

.. code-block::

    @override(TorchLearner)
    def compute_loss_for_module(self, *, module_id, config, batch, fwd_out):
        ...

        loss_xyz = ...

        # Log a specific loss term.
        self.metrics.log_value("special_loss_term", loss_xyz, window=1)

        total_loss = loss_abc + loss_xyz

        return total_loss

Take a look at this running
`end-to-end example for logging custom values inside a loss function <https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/master/rllib/examples/metrics/custom_metrics_in_loss_function.py>`__ here.

Example 3: How to use MetricsLogger in a custom Algorithm
---------------------------------------------------------

You can log metrics inside your custom Algorithm :py:meth:`~ray.rllib.algorithms.algorithm.Algorithm.training_step` method.
Use the Algorithm's own ``self.metrics`` attribute for this.

.. code-block::

    @override(Algorithm)
    def training_step(self) -> None:
        ...

        # Log some value.
        self.metrics.log_value("some_mean_result", 1.5, window=5)

        ...

        with self.metrics.log_time(("timers", "some_code")):
            ... # time some code

> Take a look at this running

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See this running
```

> `end-to-end example for logging inside training_step() <https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/master/rllib/examples/metrics/custom_metrics_in_algorithm_training_step.py>`__ here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`end-to-end example for logging inside training_step() <https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/master/rllib/examples/metrics/custom_metrics_in_algorithm_training_step.py>`__.
```
